---
templateKey: blog-post
title: Nope (2022) Dir. Jordan Peele
date: 2023-12-29T20:25:50.931Z
description: "In-depth film review of Jordan Peele's Nope (2022) - a social
  commentary on spectacle and Hollywood exploitation. "
featuredpost: true
featuredimage: https://m.media-amazon.com/images/M/MV5BMGIyNTI3NWItNTJkOS00MGYyLWE4NjgtZDhjMWQ4Y2JkZTU5XkEyXkFqcGdeQXVyNjY1MTg4Mzc@._V1_FMjpg_UX1000_.jpg
tags: []
---
Universally, Jordan Peele's science fiction thriller, Nope (2022) is not everyone's cup of tea. Many fans of the filmmaker as well as casual movie-goers were disappointed by the picture - due to their own expectations of what the film was supposed to be. Maybe, the disappointment materialised because the story and themes did not "live up to" Peele's directorial debut film, Get Out (2017). Maybe, the pace of the narrative did not appeal to the masses of audiences anticipating surface-level spectacle for 130 minutes, or it could be that audience's found the marketing to be deceiving. Nevertheless, it is prominently because Peele sets out to subvert audience expectations. Throughout the fundamental studio filmmaking periods of the 40s, 50s, 80s, and today, audience's have been exposed to recycled, commercial Hollywood products - and continue to rely on them for entertainment. It's understandble - to a degree. Going to the movies is an activity, and it has been for many generations. It's an investment. Audience's spend their own money to have an event experience. So, what gives Jordan Peele the right to produce something that audience's didn't sign up for? Firstly, film's can have different agenda's. They can be fascinating by enriching your understanding of social, political, industrial and historical issues occuring within a multitude of cultures and organisations around the world. Secondly, audience expectations were naturally constructed and developed throughout the history of studio filmmaking - an economic filmmaking system that produces genre films to create a sense of familiarity for audiences. Familiarity, in this case, is in the form of narrative conventions, themes, characterisations, locations, costumes, and score. As a result, recycled and commercialised products generate box office revenue and profit - ultimately, continuing the film cycle. If audience's continue to engage with the same formulaic films, they will be disappointed when a film that isn't formulaic deceives them.

If we go back to the films' marketing approach, it is clear that the trailer indicates that the audience can expect an alien invasion/UFO film, with a horror undertone. Now, theoretically speaking, that is exactly what occurs in the film. But, not in the same way that audiences' were expecting. The purpose of the deceptive trailer is to set audiences' expectations from the marketing stage - surrounding a belief that the filmmaker is conforming to the narrative and thematic structures of Hollywood UFO pictures such as Steven Spielberg's Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977) and E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982). In doing so, Peele's social and industrial commentary on 'spectacle' and 'Hollywood exploitation' is, therefore, placed at the epicenter of Nope's intention. His storytelling and filmmaking style as well as his personal vision consists of not only bending traditional and constructed genres, but reinventing them. From reinventing the social thriller to using horror as a sub-genre, and now taking on science fiction head first, it is with these means that Peele's work should not be taken at face value. In fact, the way in which his films can and should be understood are through genre subversion, symbolism, foreshadowing, layered dialogue, themes, allegory, cinematography, mise en scène and acting methods - which, ultimately, relate to a social, political or industrial commentary. The film highlights the traditional genre tropes within the narrative to draw the audience in to inform them of the issues surrounding spectacle consumption, on and off the screen, so to speak. Therefore, Peele is exploiting audience psychology and spectatorship to convey his message.

There are three storytelling techniques within this picture that are of high importance for successfully commentating on societal and industrialized issues - symbolism, allegory and foreshadowing. The commentaries within this film could not be achieved without these three techniques. Firstly, the symbolic representation of spectacle and Hollywood exploitation stems from OJ and Emerald Haywood's discovery of the 'UFO', situated in the clouds above their family-owned Haywood Hollywood Ranch. The UFO has two major connotations. It functions as symbolic representation for the spectacle that has consumed past and present cultures as well as the desire and obsession to capture spectacle - what ever the scale of it may be. The second connotation of the UFO is Hollywood exploitation, which falls under allegorical representation. As the UFO is allegorical for the Hollywood film industry's obsession with spectacle, the UFO's purpose is to suck people in, chew them up and spits them out - not unlike the system of Hollywood filmmaking. Therefore, this reaffirms that the film has multiple thematic and storytelling layers that audiences' overlooked, as they wanted their own spectacle experience. The film comments on cultural and industrial integrity and greed, which, relates to how people and businesses would sacrifice their own values and ideology for more and more spectacle. This can be seen through how people defy logic to create, showcase or promote spectacle events taking place - whether or not it is important, disaterous or morally wrong. 

Peele's concern of spectacle is commented on through the use of horses within the film. Horses are a prime example of how Hollywood have mistreated animals for their films - using them as an object for entertainment purposes only. Particularly within western genre films. Peele, therefore, connects this with Hollywood exploitation, as the UFO is determined to abduct the horses to suck them up to the sky - symbolising the Hollywood film industry taking what they want for their own benefit. Another key example of this involves Emerald Haywood watching an Oprah Winfrey interview, alone in her trailer. Oprah begins the interview by stating: "I'm talking today to women who say they have been abducted by aliens from another planet". A woman on the show replies: "May I briefly say, I don't know for a fact that they're from another planet. To which Oprah contends: "Well, you know you weren't in Kansas anymore, Toto" - referencing The Wizard of Oz (1939). The woman then replies by stating: "...and I wasn't wearing red shoes that I could click together." The Wizard of Oz is the pinnacle for showcasing spectacle through the film's use of technicolor and creating a world that audiences have not seen before. This highlights Peele's layered dialogue as each element of the dialogue is symbolic for the commentary of spectacle and Hollywood exploitation. Spectacle is highlighted in many forms throughout the film. A fight occurs during a sequence involving OJ, Emerald and Angel, situated inside a diner, discussing their plan to capture footage of the UFO. The fight takes place outside of the diner, in the parking lot. In today's culture, people would witness that - and recorded it on their phones - if they needed to be consumed by a spectacle, and ultimately to post it on social media. However, as the three of them spectacle of their own to capture, which is on a larger scale, they don't notice this. This is symbolic for individuals being distracted by spectacle that serves them, as opposed to helping people in need. The Alien motif is vigarous within the film, as Peele plays with the audience's experience of watching Alien's on screen. Therefore, Peele does not introduce us to any conventional Alien's within the Film. Instead, he creates a visual motif of Alien's within the mise en scène, such as the cameras on the set of the 'Gordy's Home!' - which look like Alien's. In addition, the Alien merchandise at Jupiter's Claim, most predominantly, Peele allows us to think Alien's have broken into the horse stables on the Ranch, but, upon investigation, OJ discovers that the supposed Alien invasion results in Jupe's kid's wearing alien masks to prank OJ and his sister. 

The filmic elements displayed in Nope run parallel with the thematic storytelling techniques as Hoyte van Hoytema's cinematography and Michael Abels' score both heighten the sense of realism within the film. The sky and clouds are characters within the film due to these filmic elements conveying their importance. The cinematography, score and sound design create tension when the UFO is lurking in the sky, but we can't always see it. These elements also help place the viewer within the landscapes of the Ranch and the western theme park. The use of IMAX cameras plays into the theme of spectacle. The use of these specific cameras has a double meaning within the film, as Peele needed to shoot in IMAX, in order to achieve the scope of the picture, but also because IMAX, in of itself, provides a spectacle experience and are used as a plot device with the IMAX camera ultimately being used to capture the "Oprah shot'. To this end, the use of handheld camera techniques create a visceral experience for the viewer. Moreover, the title cards used to introduce the name of the film and also the name of each horse are simplistic and minimalistic - this subverts audience expectations of what they would normally witness on screen from a Hollywood film - title cards are typically spectacular in of themselves - this also draws attention away from any excess spectacle from the film and allows the audience to focus on the commentary on spectacle.

N.O.P.E = Not of Planet Earth