---
templateKey: blog-post
title: Nope (2022) Dir. Jordan Peele
date: 2023-12-31T17:56:45.964Z
featuredpost: true
featuredimage: https://m.media-amazon.com/images/M/MV5BMGIyNTI3NWItNTJkOS00MGYyLWE4NjgtZDhjMWQ4Y2JkZTU5XkEyXkFqcGdeQXVyNjY1MTg4Mzc@._V1_.jpg
---
**An in-depth film analysis of Jordan Peele's (2022) - a social commentary on spectacle and Hollywood exploitation**

Jordan Peele's storytelling and filmmaking style, as well as his personal vision, consist of not only bending traditional and established genres but also reinventing them. From reinventing the social thriller to using horror as a sub-genre, and most recently, taking on science fiction head-first, it is with these means that Peele's work should not be taken at face value. In fact, the way in which his films can and should be understood is through the use of genre subversion, symbolism, foreshadowing, layered dialogue, themes, allegory, cinematography, mise en scène, and acting methods, which ultimately relate to a social, political, economic, or industrial commentary.

Peele's third collaboration with Universal Pictures, *Nope* (2022), was not completely successful in landing its social, industrial, and economic commentary. The science fiction thriller is not everyone's cup of tea. Many fans of the filmmaker as well as casual moviegoers were disappointed by the picture due to their own expectations of what they thought they were going to be witnessing on screen. Maybe the disappointment materialised because the story and themes did not "live up to" Peele's directorial debut film, *Get Out* (2017). Maybe the pace of the narrative did not appeal to the masses of audiences anticipating surface-level spectacle for 130 minutes, or it could be that audiences found the marketing to be deceiving. Nevertheless, it is prominently because Peele set out to subvert the expectations of everyone lining up to see what is behind the curtain of his latest trick.

Throughout the fundamental studio filmmaking periods of the 40s, 50s, and 80s, and especially in the current climate of Hollywood filmmaking, audiences have been exposed to recycled commercial products and continue to rely on them for entertainment. It's understandable—to a degree. Going to the movies is an activity, and it has been for many generations. It's an investment. Audiences spend their own money to have an event experience. So, what gives Jordan Peele the right to provide an experience to worldwide audiences that they didn't sign up for? Firstly, films can have different agendas. They can be fascinating by enriching your understanding of social, political, industrial, and historical issues occurring within a multitude of cultures and organisations around the world.

Secondly, an economic system in Hollywood sets out to produce genre films to create a sense of familiarity for audiences. Familiarity, in this case, is in the form of narrative conventions, themes, characterizations, locations, costumes, and scores. Major Hollywood studios aim to create recycled and commercialised products based on audience spectatorship to generate box office revenue and profit, ultimately continuing the film cycle. Therefore, if audiences continue to engage with the same formulaic films, they will be disappointed when a film that isn't formulaic deceives them.

So, if we go back to *Nope's* marketing approach, it is clear that the trailer paints a picture of an alien invasion/UFO film with a horror undertone. At this point, audience expectations surrounding the film's premise and intention have been set. These particular expectations, however, lie within the psychological implications of what they have witnessed throughout Hollywood studio filmmaking and have, therefore, become accustomed to. Now, figuratively speaking, what we see in the trailer is what audiences were given. But not in the way they were expecting. To this end, the deceptive trailer ultimately allows the film's message and third act to be surprising, subverting expectations. These expectations consist of a belief that the filmmaker is conforming to the narrative and thematic structures of Hollywood UFO pictures such as Steven Spielberg's *Close Encounters of the Third Kind* (1977) and *E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial* (1982). *Nope* highlights traditional science fiction genre tropes—instilled within the previous films mentioned—to draw the audience in while simultaneously informing them of the issues surrounding spectacle consumption, on and off the screen. Therefore, the social and industrial commentaries on spectacle and Hollywood exploitation are placed at the epicentre of the films' intention.

There are three storytelling techniques within this picture that are of high importance for successfully commentating on societal and industrialised issues: symbolism, allegory, and foreshadowing. The commentaries within this film could not be achieved without these three techniques. Firstly, the symbolic representation of spectacle and Hollywood exploitation stems from OJ Haywood (played by Daniel Kaluuya) and Emerald Haywood (played by Keke Palmer) discovering a 'UFO', situated in the clouds above their family-owned Haywood Hollywood Ranch. The UFO has two major connotations. It functions as a symbolic representation for the spectacle that has consumed past and present cultures, as well as the desire and obsession to capture spectacle, whatever the scale of it may be.

The second connotation of the UFO is Hollywood exploitation, which falls under allegorical representation. As the UFO is allegorical for the Hollywood film industry's obsession with spectacle, the UFO's purpose is to suck people in, chew them up, and spit them out—not unlike the system of Hollywood filmmaking. This reaffirms that the film has multiple thematic and storytelling layers that audiences overlooked, as they wanted their own spectacle experience. The film comments on cultural and industrial integrity and greed, which relate to how cultures and organisations sacrifice their own values and ideologies for more and more spectacle. This can be seen in how people defy logic to create, showcase, or promote spectacle, whether or not it is important, disastrous, or morally wrong.

Foreshadowing is a storytelling technique that is used masterfully by Jordan Peele throughout his three films—a technique that sets him apart from several other screenwriters in contemporary cinema. This is demonstrated in a sequence involving OJ and his father, Otis Haywood Sr. (played by Keith David), working on the ranch, as this sequence contains foreshadowing through their layered dialogue. Otis Sr. begins to discuss their family's next source of business—loaning one of their trained horses out to a major Hollywood studio—with OJ, as he exclaims, "Got to keep our heads up out of the clouds on this one." This foreshadows that OJ will be looking up at the clouds and observing the UFO. Otis Sr. continues by stating, "Now, we land this... yeah. Like *six guns.* I mean, we really put on a show; well, you know they're going to bring us back for the sequel." This highlights the commentary on Hollywood exploitation and the theme of greed that surrounds major studios' desire to want more and create sequels after the fundamental success of a commercial product. In addition, it also pertains to the idea of putting on a show for spectacle, just like how the UFO is putting on a show for its audience (those of which are attempting to capture footage of the UFO: OJ, Emerald, Angel (portrayed by Brandon Perea), and Antlers Holst (played by Michael Wincott), as well as Ricky "Jupe" Park (portrayed by Steven Yeun) putting on a show for his audience at Jupiter's Claim.

Peele's concern with spectacle is commented on through the use of horses within the film. Horses are a prime example of how Hollywood has mistreated animals throughout their film productions. Historically, major studios have been renowned for using horses as objects for entertainment purposes only, particularly in western genre films. Peele, therefore, connects this with Hollywood exploitation, as the UFO is determined to abduct the horses to suck them up to the sky, symbolising the Hollywood film industry taking what they want for their own benefit. As well as the commentary on horses within the film, Peele comments on the mistreatment of other animals, such as Gordy, the chimpanzee, in the situation comedy *Gordy's Home!* The chimp is used for spectacle on the television show, as the purpose of Gordy is to heighten the comedy and put on a show for an audience—in more ways than one. However, in a sequence that involves the Chimp becoming startled by the noise of a balloon popping and, ultimately, attacking and killing members of the cast and crew, Peele informs us that animals are not objects and cannot be tamed and displays how Hollywood desires for them to be. Peele references *E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial* within this sequence as Gordy becomes aware of a frightened Jupe, as a kid, hiding underneath a prop table. Jupe attempts to disguise himself effectively and remain alive, but Gordy navigates towards him. Unexpectedly, Gordy extends his paw, which, visually, looks like the hand of E.T.; it is also a thematic and symbolic reference to spectacle.

Another key example of this involves Emerald watching an Oprah Winfrey interview alone in her trailer. Oprah begins the interview by stating, "I'm talking today to women who say they have been abducted by aliens from another planet." Oprah's guest replies, "May I briefly say, I don't know for a fact that they're from another planet?" To which Oprah contends: "Well, you know you weren't in Kansas anymore, Toto"—a reference to *The Wizard of Oz* (1939). The woman then replies by stating, "And I wasn't wearing red shoes that I could click together." *The Wizard of Oz* is the pinnacle for showcasing spectacle through the film's use of technicolour and creating a world that audiences have not seen before. This highlights Peele's layered dialogue, as each element of the dialogue is symbolic for the commentary on spectacle and Hollywood exploitation.

Spectacle is highlighted in many forms throughout the film. A fight occurs during a sequence involving OJ, Emerald, and Angel, situated inside a diner. The fight takes place outside of the diner, in the parking lot. In today's culture, this fight would be the main source of spectacle that would catch the attention of everyone around them. However, as the three characters have their minds set on capturing spectacle of their own, they are oblivious to this event taking place. This is symbolic of individuals being distracted by spectacle that serves them as opposed to helping people in need.

Moreover, the title cards used to introduce the film as well as the names of each individual horse are simplistic and minimalistic. The intention behind using these title cards is to subvert the conventional yet contemporary 3-D-styled title cards used to introduce blockbuster event films. As title cards are typically spectacular in themselves, Peele begins his commentary on spectacle from the onset of the film, drawing attention away from any spectacular excess and ultimately forcing the audience to focus on the commentary on spectacle as opposed to the spectacle that they may desire or expect.

The Alien motif is vigorous within the film, as Peele plays with the audience's experience of witnessing Alien's through the medium of cinema and media. Therefore, he does not introduce us to any conventional aliens within the film. Instead, he creates a visual motif of Alien's through the use of mise en scène. Key examples of this can be seen through the design of the cameras on the set of *Gordy's Home!*, which look like alien faces. In addition, the Alien merchandise at Jupiter's Claim is used to make the audiences think that the film conforms to the stereotypical visualisation of Alien's. Peele also allows us to believe that aliens have broken into the horse stables on the ranch. However, upon investigation, OJ discovers that the supposed alien invasion is in fact an elaborate prank involving Jupe's kid's breaking into their ranch while wearing alien masks. The alien masks and merchandise displayed at Jupiter's Claim run parallel with Peele's commentary on the science fiction genre, as they are commercial products alongside the alien invasion/UFO genre movies that the Hollywood film industry recycles. Both are creating an untruthful, stereotypical idea of what aliens and UFOs look like and what they should be understood as in order to generate profit based on what audiences believe them to be.

In addition to the Alien Motif, the film obtains a motif surrounding circles. This motif symbolises the stereotypical shape of what society believes a UFO is—propaganda that has been fed to multi-cultural societies throughout the history of film, television, and media. Therefore, the mise en scène throughout *Nope* is representative of the UFO. This is highlighted through the introduction of the ranch, as OJ attaches the trained horses to a metal horse exerciser as he walks them around in a circle. Additionally, the circle motif is reaffirmed through the shape and spinning of the vinyl that Emerald is listening to before a power cut occurs, stopping the vinyl from spinning. Not only can this motif be categorised as symbolic for the film itself, but it also functions as a psychological tool to weave its way into the minds of audiences in order for them to subconsciously see circles everywhere they look. Therefore, Peele is utilising the stereotypical UFO that is ingrained in our minds to surprise the audience when the twist occurs in the third act.

The filmic elements displayed in *Nope* run parallel with its thematic storytelling techniques, as Hoyte van Hoytema's cinematography and Michael Abels' score both heighten the sense of realism within the film. The sky and clouds are characters within the film due to these filmic elements conveying their importance. Various handheld and wide shots that are used to capture the sky and clouds—some with the UFO visible—are referred to as the 'Spielberg gaze'. A cinematic gaze is conveyed in many of his pictures, but one film that is particularly relevant to *Nope* is *Close Encounters of the Third Kind*. Spielberg's UFO blockbuster created a visceral experience through the use of cinematography as the protagonist encounters the spacecraft within close proximity. This occurs within a sequence involving Roy Neary (played by Richard Dreyfuss) attempting to decipher a map as a UFO hovers behind his car before flying over it. In *Nope*, Peele used this sequence as inspiration for various sequences involving O.J. coming face-to-face with the UFO.

Additionally, the cinematography, score, and sound design simultaneously work together to create tension when the UFO is lurking in the sky, but we can't always see it. The use of handheld camera techniques also helps to create a visceral experience for the viewer. These elements ultimately help place the viewer within the landscape of the ranch and Jupiter's Claim. The use of IMAX cameras plays into the theme of spectacle as they obtain a double meaning within the film. Peele needed to shoot in IMAX, not only in order to achieve the scope of the picture but also because IMAX, in and of itself, provides a spectacle experience for audiences. Ultimately, IMAX is used as a plot device in a literal and symbolic sense, as an IMAX camera becomes the primary source of capturing the 'Oprah shot' and exposing the UFO.

Before the evidence of the UFO/alien's existence is officially captured and ultimately defeated, the spacecraft transforms into an alien species. This is, however, unlike the conventional aliens that audiences are used to. The alien is a wingspread, airborne species that transforms from a disc-shaped flying object. This transformation is symbolic of the Hollywood film industry being reconstructed and becoming unconventional, just like the UFO. The defeat of the UFO is symbolic of Hollywood's exploitation becoming obsolete and people taking full control of what is categorised as spectacle as well as what should contribute towards creating spectacle. This is in opposition to business-driven corporations that will do anything or use anything to formulate, create, and showcase spectacle.

N.O.P.E. = Not of Planet Earth